Post: Got the time (#220)
mauroservienti/milestone.github.io: _posts/got-the-time.md

---
layout: post
header_image: /img/posts/got-the-time/header.jpg

> title: "Got the time"

Author: No, it's the title of a [song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=be7iNHw8QoQ)

{
   public async Task Handle(InvoiceIssued message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
   {
      //...
   }

   protected override void ConfigureHowToFindSaga(SagaPropertyMapper<OverdueInvoiceData> mapper)
   {
      mapper.MapSaga(d => d.InvoiceNumber).ToMessage<InvoiceIssued>(m => m.InvoiceNumber);
   }
}
```

Many things are happening all at the same time. Let's dissect them one by one. The first notable thing is that the saga class implements the `IAmStartedByMessages<TMessage>` interface. The interface tells NServiceBus that the given message type can start the saga; in our sample `InvoiceIssued`. The interface requires our code to implement the `Handle` method, which we'll use later to do something meaningful.

The last bit is the `ConfigureHowToFindSaga` protected method; it's required by the `Saga<T>` base class; it explains to NServiceBus how to find a saga in the configured persistence storage. In our case, we're configuring NServiceBus to map the incoming message `InvoiceNumber` property to the `InvoiceNumber` property defined on the saga data class. When a message arrives, NServiceBus will use the configured mappings to look up the saga data in the storage.

> > For more information on messages correlation, refer to the [NServiceBus documentation](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/sagas/message-correlation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For more information on message correlation, refer to the [NServiceBus documentation](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/sagas/message-correlation).
```

> One could argue that if the saga can be started by the `InvoiceIssued` even, there is no point in mapping the message as, by definition, there won't be an existing saga for that invoice. There at least a couple of cases in which we need that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One could argue that if the saga can be started by the `InvoiceIssued` event, there is no point in mapping the message as, by definition, there won't be an existing saga for that invoice. There at least a couple of cases in which we need that:
```

- Duplicate messages: if we're dealing with an "at-least-once" type of transport, we should expect that the infrastructure can deliver the same message multiple times. In that case, we don't want to create a saga instance for each duplicate message; instead, we want to dispatch duplicates to the same saga instance and handle them idempotently.

> - Out of order messages: There are scenarios in which sagas can have many entry points, e.g., more than one message type can start a saga. If this is the case, we cannot assume that the `InvoiceIssued` event is the first to arrive. The saga instance might have been already created by a different message.

Reviewer: Maybe say that you'll cover this later in the post

```suggestion
- Out of order messages: There are scenarios in which sagas can have many entry points, e.g., more than one message type can start a saga. If this is the case, we cannot assume that the `InvoiceIssued` event is the first to arrive. The saga instance might have been already created by a different message. We'll come back to this later in the post.
```

   IHandleMessages<InvoicePaid>
{
   public Task Handle(InvoicePaid message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
   {
      MarkAsComplete();
      return Task.CompletedTask;
   }
}
```

(rest of the code omitted for clarity)

Two things worth noting:

1. `InvoicePaid` is marked as `IHandleMessages<>`, which means that the `InvoicePaid` event cannot start the saga.
2. When the invoice is paid, we can mark the saga as complete; as said, a paid invoice is by definition not overdue; we don't need to keep track of it anymore.

## Delayed deliveries to model time

The initial skeleton of the process is in place. It's now time to design the overdue check. In our case, all issued invoices are due in thirty days. We assume that a bank wire transfer might take a few days to appear on our bank account. Given the two conditions, it's worth checking invoice payments after forty days. When using sagas, we can leverage saga timeouts as a handy tool to model time:

```csharp
public async Task Handle(InvoiceIssued message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
{
   var checkDate = DateTime.Now.AddDays(40);
   await RequestTimeout<CheckPayment>(context, checkDate);
}
```

> > The usage of `DateTime.Now` is terrible. It makes the code untestable and not timezones safe. Production-ready code needs to inject a component that can provide that information and use `DateTimeOffset` and account for time zones.

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning the magic number of 40 as well? You could say the whole thing should be offloaded to a `GetPaymentPolicyDueDate` component method but since this is an aside, I won't argue if you want to keep it simple.

> > The usage of `DateTime.Now` is terrible. It makes the code untestable and not timezones safe. Production-ready code needs to inject a component that can provide that information and use `DateTimeOffset` and account for time zones.

Author: ```suggestion
> The usage of `DateTime.Now` is terrible. It makes the code untestable and not timezones safe. Production-ready code needs to inject a component that can provide that information and use `DateTimeOffset` and account for time zones. For the same reason, the number "40" should not be hardcoded; We should delegate the decision to a dedicated component injected via DI into the saga.
```

> In the `Handle` method for the `InvoceIssued` event, we're scheduling a timeout using the `RequestTimeout` saga method. A timeout is nothing else than a message expected to be delivered in the future. The `CheckPayment` type represents the message that the infrastructure will dispatch in the future, and the `checkDate` argument is the "when" in the future. `CheckPayment`, in this sample, is an empty class such as the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `Handle` method for the `InvoiceIssued` event, we're scheduling a timeout using the `RequestTimeout` saga method. A timeout is nothing else than a message expected to be delivered in the future. The `CheckPayment` type represents the message that the infrastructure will dispatch in the future, and the `checkDate` argument is the "when" in the future. `CheckPayment`, in this sample, is an empty class such as the following:
```

```csharp
class OverdueInvoicePolicy :
   Saga<OverdueInvoicePolicy.OverdueInvoiceData>,
   IAmStartedByMessages<InvoiceIssued>,
   IHandleMessagesMessages<InvoicePaid>,
   IHandleTimeouts<CheckPayment>
{
   public async Task Timeout(CheckPayment state, IMessageHandlerContext context)
   {
      //...
   }
}
```

(rest of the code omitted for clarity)

What are we going to do when the timeout expires? When the timeout is due, NServiceBus dispatches the `CheckPayment` timeout message to the saga; at this point, we can check the payment status of the invoice and act accordingly:

```csharp
public async Task Timeout(CheckPayment state, IMessageHandlerContext context)
{
   var invoiceNumber = Data.InvoiceNumber;
   var isInvoicePaid = _invoiceService.IsInvoicePaid(invoiceNumber);
   if(!isInvoicePaid)
   {
      await context.Publish(new InvoiceOverdueEvent()
      {
         InvoiceNumber = invoiceNumber
      });
   }

   MarkAsComplete();
}
```

> The invoice service (`_invoiceService`), injected into the saga via IoC/DI, is a component that, given an invoice number, returns its payment status.

> When time is due, the saga, using the provided invoice service, checks the payment status. If the invoice is overdue, it raises an event accordingly and then marks itself as complete; If the invoice is settled, it immediately marks itself as complete. The saga has one single responsibility, to check for overdue invoices; the saga is not responsible for any further action; it delegates other activities to the endpoints handling the `InvoiceOverdue` event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When time has come, the saga, using the provided invoice service, checks the payment status. If the invoice is overdue, it raises an event accordingly and then marks itself as complete. If the invoice is settled, it immediately marks itself as complete. The saga has one single responsibility, to check for overdue invoices; the saga is not responsible for any further action. It delegates other activities to the endpoints handling the `InvoiceOverdue` event.
```

### Checking is redundant

> Do we need to use an invoice service to check if a given invoice is overdue or not? The answer is no, and this comes with a significant simplification of the saga code. In our scenario, all the messages that the saga handles correctly describe all the possible options. When customers order, the system issues the `InvoiceIssued` event; when they pay, the system publishes the `InvoicePaid` event. There is no need to check for the status when the `CheckPayment` timeout expires from the overdue invoices saga perspective. When an invoice is paid, the infrastructure deletes the corresponding saga (mark as complete) which also removes the timeout. When NServiceBus successfully dispatches the timeout to the saga, it means that the customer didn't pay that specific invoice yet. The mere existence of the timeout means the invoice hasn't been paid.

Author: ```suggestion
Do we need to use an invoice service to check if a given invoice is overdue or not? The answer is no, and this comes with a significant simplification of the saga code. In our scenario, all the messages that the saga handles correctly describe all the possible options. When customers order, the system issues the `InvoiceIssued` event; when they pay, the system publishes the `InvoicePaid` event. There is no need to check for the status when the `CheckPayment` timeout expires from the overdue invoices saga perspective. When an invoice is paid, the infrastructure deletes the corresponding saga (mark as complete). When NServiceBus successfully dispatches the timeout to the saga, it means that the customer didn't pay that specific invoice yet. The mere existence of the timeout means the invoice hasn't been paid.
```

> Do we need to use an invoice service to check if a given invoice is overdue or not? The answer is no, and this comes with a significant simplification of the saga code. In our scenario, all the messages that the saga handles correctly describe all the possible options. When customers order, the system issues the `InvoiceIssued` event; when they pay, the system publishes the `InvoicePaid` event. There is no need to check for the status when the `CheckPayment` timeout expires from the overdue invoices saga perspective. When an invoice is paid, the infrastructure deletes the corresponding saga (mark as complete); this makes it so that NServiceBus discards the timeout. When NServiceBus successfully dispatches the timeout to the saga, it means that the customer didn't pay that specific invoice yet. The saga can assume that if the timeout reaches the saga, it can publish the `InvoiceOverdue` event; no one paid the invoice yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do we need to use an invoice service to check if a given invoice is overdue or not? The answer is no, and this comes with a significant simplification of the saga code. In our scenario, all the messages that the saga handles correctly describe all the possible options. When customers order, the system issues the `InvoiceIssued` event; when they pay, the system publishes the `InvoicePaid` event. There is no need to check for the status when the `CheckPayment` timeout expires from the overdue invoices saga perspective. When an invoice is paid, the infrastructure deletes the corresponding saga (mark as complete) which also removes the timeout. When NServiceBus successfully dispatches the timeout to the saga, it means that the customer didn't pay that specific invoice yet. The mere existence of the timeout means the invoice hasn't been paid.
```

### Order matters: Issue, pay, mark as complete

At this point, an interesting question is:

> What happens to the timeout if the `InvoicePaid` message arrives before the timeout expires?

> Previously, we defined it as completed when the saga handles the `InvoicePaid` message. However, if the saga receives messages in the following order:

Reviewer: I'm confused by this part. In the last section, you said that when an InvoicePaid event happens, the saga is marked as complete and the timeout is deleted. This section says when an invoice is marked as paid, the timeout will stick around.

Author: Good catch. The previous sentence is wrong, the timeout is not deleted. It will be when it expires and the saga doesn't exist anymore.

- Invoice issued (which causes the saga to schedule the timeout)
- Invoice paid

We might find ourselves in a situation where the timeout is scheduled, but there is no saga to dispatch the message to because it's already completed. NServiceBus handles the scenario for us; when the timeout expires, the message is automatically discarded if the saga doesn't exist. The assumption is that an existing saga can only schedule a timeout for itself (there is no way to schedule timeouts for a different saga). If the saga doesn't exist anymore, it's fair to assume that it's already completed. The timeout doesn't make sense anymore.

There are other scenarios in which message ordering is essential from the business perspective.

> Imagine the case in which customers are paying with a credit card at the time of the order. The generated invoice is immediately paid. The `InvoicePaid` event may arrive before the `InvoiceIssued`. Remember that physical message ordering is extremely hard, if ever possible, in distributed systems. With the above saga, the described scenario surfaces a problem. The saga is designed to be started only by the `InvoceIssued` message. If `InvocePaid` is dispatched first, NServiceBus cannot find an existing saga; the only viable assumption is that the saga is already completed, and thus the message can be discarded. Later NServiceBus processes the `InvoiceIssued` message and creates the saga. It is a data/message loss scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine the case in which customers are paying with a credit card at the time of the order. The generated invoice is immediately paid. The `InvoicePaid` event may arrive before the `InvoiceIssued`. Remember that physical message ordering is extremely hard, if ever possible, in distributed systems. With the above saga, the described scenario surfaces a problem. The saga is designed to be started only by the `InvoiceIssued` message. If `InvoicePaid` is dispatched first, NServiceBus cannot find an existing saga; the only viable assumption is that the saga is already completed, and thus the message can be discarded. Later NServiceBus processes the `InvoiceIssued` message and creates the saga. It is a data/message loss scenario.
```

Suppose we find ourselves in a case like the one described above, which is true for most scenarios. In that case, we want to make sure that NServiceBus can start the saga regardless of messages arrival order:

```csharp
class OverdueInvoicePolicy :
   Saga<OverdueInvoicePolicy.OverdueInvoiceData>,
   IAmStartedByMessages<InvoiceIssued>,
   IAmStartedByMessages<InvoicePaid>,
   IHandleTimeouts<CheckPayment>
{
   public async Task Handle(InvoiceIssued message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
   {
      //...
   }

   public async Task Handle(InvoicePaid message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
   {
      //...
   }

}
```

> All the messages that can start the saga are marked as `IAmStartedByMessages<>`. The next step is to explain to NServiceBus how to correlated both messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the messages that can start the saga are marked as `IAmStartedByMessages<>`. The next step is to explain to NServiceBus how to correlate both messages:
```

```csharp
protected override void ConfigureHowToFindSaga(SagaPropertyMapper<OverdueInvoiceData> mapper)
{
   mapper.MapSaga(d => d.InvoiceNumber).ToMessage<InvoiceIssued>(m => m.InvoiceNumber);
   mapper.MapSaga(d => d.InvoiceNumber).ToMessage<InvoicePaid>(m => m.InvoiceNumber);
}
```

Finally, we need a way for the saga to determine when it received all the messages. We can easily do that by storing that information in the saga data type:

```csharp
class OverdueInvoiceData : ContainSagaData
{
   public int InvoiceNumber { get; set; }
   public bool InvoiceIssuedReceived { get;set; }
   public bool InvoicePaidReceived { get;set; }
}
```

> And use the two new flags in the code that handles incoming messages. 

Author: ```suggestion
And use the two new flags in the code that handles incoming messages. For example:

```csharp
class OverdueInvoicePolicy :
   Saga<OverdueInvoicePolicy.OverdueInvoiceData>,
   IAmStartedByMessages<InvoiceIssued>,
   IAmStartedByMessages<InvoicePaid>,
   IHandleTimeouts<CheckPayment>
{
   public async Task Handle(InvoiceIssued message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
   {
      Data.InvoiceIssuedReceived = true;
      if (Data.InvoiceIssuedReceived && Data.InvoicePaidReceived)
      {
         MarkAsComplete();
         return;
      }
      
      //rest of the code
   }
   public async Task Handle(InvoicePaid message, IMessageHandlerContext context)
   {
      Data.InvoicePaidReceived = true;
      if (Data.InvoiceIssuedReceived && Data.InvoicePaidReceived)
      {
         MarkAsComplete();
         return;
      }
      
      //rest of the code
   }
}
```
```

> And use the two new flags in the code that handles incoming messages. 

Reviewer: I know it's simple but I feel a quick code sample showing these flags being set in the `Handle` methods is warranted.
